---
clean_pagebreak: true
---

40 · Truth & Reconciliation Commission
Endnotes
1. In this context, the Commission defines a "visit" as one person attending one day of one National Event. The Commission made daily attendance estimates of its National Events but did not attempt to track those individuals who attended more than one day of any single National Event.
2. Schedule N to the Settlement Agreement provides at section 1(e) that one of the goals of the Commission is to "identify sources and create as complete an historical record as possible of the IRS system and legacy." In addition, section 11 of Schedule N provides that "Canada and the churches will provide all relevant documents in their possession or control to and for the use of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission" and that Canada and the churches are required to "compile all relevant documents in an organized manner for review by the Commission and to provide access to their archives for the Commission to carry out its mandate."
3. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2013 ONSC 684 at para 69. 4. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 283 (CanLII) at paras. 24­25. 5. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 283 (CanLII) at paras. 24­25. 6. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 283 (CanLII) at para 191. 7. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 283 (CanLII) at para 192. 8. Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General), 2014 ONSC 4585 (CanLII) at para 19. 9. The Catholic entities filed main appeals and the Commission and the National Centre filed cross
appeals. Based on preliminary documents filed by the Catholic entities, it appears that they intend to argue that no notice period should be ordered and that the IAP documents cannot be archived without the consent of alleged perpetrators and other persons of interest. The Commission intends to appear before the Court of Appeal of Ontario to argue that the IAP documents cannot be destroyed without consulting IAP claimants. 10. The Commission's engagement with the United Nations included participation at the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, the Expert Panel on Indigenous Issues, an Expert Seminar on Truth Commissions and Access to Justice, and a Human Rights Council Special Panel on Education and Teaching History. 11. A complete list of projects funded is available on the website of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada at http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100015635/1100100015636.
