---
clean_pagebreak: true
---

Students working in the kitchen at the Cross Lake, Manitoba, school in the early 1920s. St. Boniface Historical Society Archives; Roman Catholic Archbishop of Keewatin-The Pas Fonds; N1826.
producing satisfactorily, the students did not always get the full benefit. Often, the milk was separated, with the skimmed milk served to the children.326 The milk fat was turned to butter and cream, which was frequently sold to raise funds for the schools. Inspector W. Murison noted in 1925 that the cows at the Elkhorn, Manitoba, school were producing enough milk for the school, but the students were not getting "the full benefit of this milk as I found that they were making about 30 lbs. of butter a week, and a great deal of the milk given the children is separated milk, which has not much food value."327
In 1942, the federal government issued Canada's Official Food Rules, an early version of the Canada Food Guide.328 Inspectors quickly discovered that residential school diets did not measure up to the Food Rules. Dr. L. B. Pett, the head of the federal government's Nutrition Division, concluded in 1947, on the basis of inspections his staff had done, that "no school was doing a good feeding job."329 It was not until the late 1950s that the federal government adopted a residential school food allowance calculated to provide a diet deemed "fully adequate nutritionally."330 Even with the increase in funding, schools still had difficulty providing students with adequate meals. A 1966 dietician's report on Yukon Hall in Whitehorse observed that although the Canada Food Guide requirements were
