---
clean_pagebreak: true
---

treatment of Aboriginal peoples in these other countries has strong parallels to what happened to Aboriginal peoples in Canada. Specifically, Canada objected to the Declaration's
provisions dealing with lands, territories and resources; free, prior and informed consent when used as a veto; self-government without recognition of the importance of negotiations; intellectual property; military issues; and the need to achieve an appropriate balance between the rights and obligations of Indigenous peoples, member States and third parties.10
Although these four countries eventually endorsed the Declaration, they have all done so conditionally. In 2010, Canada endorsed the Declaration as a "non-legally binding aspirational document."11 Despite this endorsement, we believe that the provisions and the vision of the Declaration do not currently enjoy government acceptance. However, because Canada has accepted the Declaration, we hold the federal government to its word that it will genuinely aspire to achieve its provisions.
In 2011, Canadian churches and social justice advocacy groups who had campaigned for Canada's adoption of the Declaration urged the federal government to implement it. However, Canada's interpretation of the Declaration remained unchanged. On September 22, 2014, at the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples (wcip) in New York, the United Nations General Assembly adopted an action-oriented "Outcome Document" to guide the implementation of the Declaration. Member states from around the world committed, among other things, to the following:
Taking, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous peoples, appropriate measures at the national level, including legislative, policy, and administrative measures, to achieve the ends of the Declaration, and to promote awareness of it among all sectors of society, including members of legislatures, the judiciary and the civil service.... [para. 7] We commit ourselves to cooperating with indigenous peoples, through their own representative institutions, to develop and implement national action plans, strategies or other measures, where relevant, to achieve the ends of the Declaration [para. 8] ... [and also] encourage the private sector, civil society and academic institutions to take an active role in promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples. [para. 30]12
The "Outcome Document" represented an important step forward with regard to implementing the Declaration in practical terms. The development of national action plans, strategies, and other concrete measures will provide the necessary structural and institutional frameworks for ensuring that Indigenous peoples' right to self-determination is realized across the globe.
Canada issued a formal statement at the wcip, objecting to certain paragraphs of the document related to the principle of obtaining the "free, prior and informed consent" (fpic) of Indigenous peoples when states are making decisions that will affect their rights or interests, including economic development on their lands. Canada said,
