---
clean_pagebreak: true
---

The challenge of reconciliation · 371
100. Healing Fund, Anglican Church, 2008, cited in Bush, "How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies," 24­25.
101. Healing Fund, Anglican Church, 2000, cited in Bush, "How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies," 19.
102. Bush, "How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies," 18. 103. The Aboriginal Healing Foundation (AHF) was mandated to provide funding and support for
Aboriginal community-based healing projects. For more on the history of the AHF and the circumstances surrounding the closure, see: Spear, "Full Circle," http://www.ahf.ca/downloads/full-circle-2.pdf (accessed 28 April 2015). 104. TRC, AVS, Allan Sutherland, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-067. 105. TRC, AVS, Esther Lachinette-Diabo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 24 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24Nov10-020. 106. TRC, AVS, Charlotte Marten, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 9 October 2013, Statement Number: SP127. 107. Education scholar Penney Clark's study identifies how Aboriginal peoples have been portrayed in Canadian history textbooks and how gaps in the history impact students. See: Clark, "Representations of Aboriginal People," 96­98, 103­111. 108. Council of Ministers of Education, "Developments on Indian Residential Schools by Jurisdiction," July 2014, email correspondence from Christy Bressette, Coordinator, Aboriginal Education, Council of Ministers of Education, Canada to Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 18 July 2014, TRC Document Number TRC3353. 109. Council of Ministers of Education, "Education Ministers Signal Transformation Key," http://cmec. ca/278/Press-Releases/Education-Ministers-Signal-Transformation-Key-to-the-Future.html?id_ article=826. 110. Freedom of conscience and religion is protected under Section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and Section 3 of Québec's Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms. 111. S.L. v. Commission scolaire des Chênes, 2012 SCC 7 (CanLII), p. 237. 112. Educator and scholar Marie Battiste's work on decolonizing and transforming the education system has informed the Commission's thinking on this issue. See: Battiste, Decolonizing Education, 175­191. 113. Education scholars Megan Boler and Michalinas Zembylas describe this way of teaching as a "pedagogy of discomfort" that requires both educators and students to "move outside their comfort zones" in constructive ways that can "radically alter their worldviews." See: Boler and Zembylas, "Discomforting Truths," 111. See also: Sheppard, "Creating a Caring Classroom." 114. See, for example, studies by education scholars: Immordino-Yang and Domasio, "We Feel, Therefore We Learn"; Schonert-Reichl and Hymel, "Educating the Heart." See also: Mary Gordon's initiative, Roots of Empathy, "an evidence-based classroom program that has shown significant effect in reducing levels of aggression among school children while raising social/emotional competence and increasing empathy," http://www.rootsofempathy.org/ (accessed 15 April 2015). See also: Gordon, Roots of Empathy. 115. TRC, AVS, Samantha Crowe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2014. Statement Number: ABNE401. For more information on the project, see: Ontario Provincial Advocate for Children and Youth, "Feathers of Hope: A First Nations Youth Action Plan, 2014," http://www.inspiritfoundation.org/files/6114/0656/0111/Feathersof-Hope_report.pdf (accessed 15 April 2015).
