---
clean_pagebreak: true
---

In 1939, Indian Affairs officials recommended that Kuper Island school staff suspected of sexually abusing students leave the province, allowing them to avoid prosecution. British Columbia Archives, pdp05505.
was not until 1968 that Indian Affairs began to compile and circulate a list of former staff members who were not to be hired at other schools without the approval of officials in Ottawa.442 The churches and the government remained reluctant to take matters to the police. As a result, prosecutions were rare.
In the documents it has reviewed, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada has identified over forty-five successful convictions of former residential school staff members who sexually or physically abused students.443 Most of these prosecutions were the result of the determination of former students to see justice done.
The full extent of the abuse that occurred in the schools is only now coming to light. As of January 31, 2015, the Independent Assessment Process (iap), established under the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement (irssa) had received 37,951 claims for injuries resulting from physical and sexual abuse at residential schools. The iap is a mechanism to compensate former students for sexual and physical abuse experienced at the schools and the harms that arose from the assaults. By the end of 2014, the iap had resolved 30,939 of those claims, awarding $2,690,000 in compensation.444 The Common Experience Payment (cep) established under irssa provided compensation to individuals who attended a school on the irssa's approved list of schools. The cep recognized the claims of 78,748 former residential school students. Although claims for compensation under the iap could be made by non-residential school students who were abused at the schools, the vast majority of iap claims were made by former residential school students. The number of claims for compensation for abuse is equivalent to approximately 48% of the number of former students who were eligible to make such claims. This number does not include those former students who died prior to May 2005.
As the numbers demonstrate, the abuse of children was rampant. From 1958, when it first opened, until 1979, there was never a year in which Grollier Hall in Inuvik did not employ at least one dormitory supervisor who would later be convicted for sexually
