106 · Truth & Reconciliation Commission
he was kneeling on the floor, and holding onto the chair."417 Eva Simpson said that at the Catholic school in The Pas, her cousin's head was shaved for running away.418
Many students spoke of teachers punishing them by pulling their ears. At Sioux Lookout, Dorothy Ross said, "one time me and this other girl were, we were, were fooling around, we were teasing each other in our own language, we got, I got caught. She pulled my ear so hard."419 Archie Hyacinthe could recall that in the classrooms of the Roman Catholic school in Kenora, "every time we didn't listen, they would tug us behind the ear, or behind the neck, or on the elbows."420 Jonas Grandjambe recalled how the nun in charge of the boys' dormitory at the Roman Catholic school in Aklavik, in the Northwest Territories, would "grab our ear and twist it."421 Delores Adolph said that the discipline she received at the Mission school impaired her hearing.422 Joseph Wabano said that at the Fort Albany, Ontario, school, the staff would hit students with a one-inch-thick board.423 Noel Starblanket recalled being constantly "slapped on the side of the head" at the Qu'Appelle school. One teacher struck him in the face and broke his nose.424
Mervin Mirasty said that at the Beauval, Saskatchewan, school, boys who were caught throwing snowballs were punished with blows to their hands from the blade of a hockey stick.425 As a punishment, Nellie Trapper, who attended the Moose Factory, Ontario, school in the 1950s, was assigned to "scrubbing the stair, the stairwell with a toothbrush, me and this other girl. Like, I don't remember what I did wrong, but that was something that I won't forget. I remember sitting on the steps, and she, our supervisor was standing there, watching us."426 Former students also spoke of how, in winter, they might be forced to stand or sit, inadequately clothed, in the snow as a form of punishment.
It was not uncommon for residential school students, traumatized by being placed in such a harsh and alien environment, to wet their beds. These students were subjected to humiliating punishments. Wendy Lafond said that at the Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, school, "if we wet our beds, we were made to stand in the corner in our pissy clothes, not allowed to change."427 Don Willie recalled that students who wet their beds were publicly humiliated at the Alert Bay school. "And they used to, they used to line up the wet bed, bedwetters, and line them up in the morning, and parade them through, parade them through breakfast, the breakfast area, pretty much to shame them."428
Policies that were seen as being unacceptable in the early twentieth century were still in place in the 1960s. Many students compared residential schools to jails: some spoke of being locked up in dormitories, broom closets, basements, and even crawl spaces. In 1965, students who ran away from the Presbyterian school in Kenora were locked up with just a mattress on the floor and put on a bread-and-milk diet.429 Students were still being locked up in what was referred to as the "counselling" room at the Poplar Hill, Ontario, school in the 1980s.430 Despite the fact that Indian Affairs had given orders to abandon the practice, students were still having their hair cropped into the 1970s.431 In the 1990s, students at the Gordon's, Saskatchewan, school were still being struck, and pushed into lockers and walls by one staff member.432

